+++
title = "Go read input"
date = 2025-08-29T19:55:35.790+01:00
draft = false
description = "Learn how to read input in Go. Includes examples of reading from standard input and files."
image = ""
imageBig = ""
categories = ["golang"]
authors = ["Cude"]
avatar = "/images/avatar.webp"
+++

# Go read input

last modified April 11, 2024

In this article we show how to read input from a user. Standard input,
often abbreviated *stdin*, is a stream from which a program reads its
input data. 

To read input from users in Go, we use the fmt, bufio, 
and os packages.

## Go read input with Scanf

The Scanf function scans text read from standard input,
storing successive space-separated values into successive arguments as
determined by the format. It returns the number of items successfully scanned.

read_input.go
  

package main

import "fmt"

func main() {

    var name string

    fmt.Print("Enter your name: ")
    fmt.Scanf("%s", &amp;name)
    fmt.Println("Hello", name)
}

The example prompts the user to enter his name.

var name string

    

We define a string variable.

fmt.Scanf("%s", &amp;name)

    

The entered value is stored into the name variable.

$ go run read_input.go 
Enter your name: Peter
Hello Peter

We run the program and enter a name.

In the next example, we read two values.

read_input2.go
  

package main

import "fmt"

func main() {

    var name string
    var age int

    fmt.Print("Enter your name &amp; age: ")
    fmt.Scanf("%s %d", &amp;name, &amp;age)
    fmt.Printf("%s is %d years old\n", name, age)
}

The program reads a name and age from the user. 

fmt.Scanf("%s %d", &amp;name, &amp;age)

    

The Scanf function reads a string and an integer to the two provided 
variables.

$ go run read_input2.go 
Enter your name &amp; age: Peter 34
Peter is 34 years old

    

## Go read input with NewReader

The bufio package implements buffered I/O. Buffered I/O has much 
better performance than non-buffered. The package wraps an io.Reader  
or io.Writer object, creating another object (Reader or Writer)
that also implements the interface but provides buffering and some help for
textual I/O. 

read_input3.go
  

package main

import (
     "os"
     "bufio"
     "fmt"
)

func main() {

     reader := bufio.NewReader(os.Stdin)

     fmt.Print("Enter your name: ")

     name, _ := reader.ReadString('\n')
     fmt.Printf("Hello %s\n", name)
}

The program reads a name from the input using bufio.NewReader.

reader := bufio.NewReader(os.Stdin)

    

We pass the standard input to the bufio.NewReader.

name, _ := reader.ReadString('\n')

    

The ReadString reads until the first occurrence of the specified
delimiter (new-line in our case) in the input, returning a string containing the 
data up to and including the delimiter.

## Go read input with NewScanner

The Scanner provides a convenient interface for reading data 
such as a file of newline-delimited lines of text.

read_input4.go
  

package main

import (
    "bufio"
    "fmt"
    "os"
)

func main() {

    names := make([]string, 0)

    scanner := bufio.NewScanner(os.Stdin)
    
    for {
        fmt.Print("Enter name: ")
        
        scanner.Scan()
        
        text := scanner.Text()

        if len(text) != 0 {

            fmt.Println(text)
            names = append(names, text)
        } else {
            break
        }
    }

    fmt.Println(names)
}

The example allows to read multiple names from the user. Press enter without 
value to finish the program.

names := make([]string, 0)

    

We create an empty slice.

scanner := bufio.NewScanner(os.Stdin)

    

A new scanner is created from the standard input.

for {
     fmt.Print("Enter name: ")
...

In a for loop, we repeatedly ask the user for a name. 

scanner.Scan()

We read a line from standard input. The Scan advances the Scanner 
to the next token, which will then be available through the Bytes 
or Text function.

text := scanner.Text()

The Text returns the most recent token generated by a call to 
Scan as a newly allocated string holding its bytes.

if len(text) != 0 {

     fmt.Println(text)
     names = append(names, text)
} else {
     break
}

If the text is not empty, we print it and append it to the slice.

fmt.Println(names)

Finally, we print all the scanned names.

$ go run read_input3.go 
Enter name: Lucia
Lucia
Enter name: Peter
Peter
Enter name: Roman     
Roman
Enter name: Jane
Jane
Enter name: [Lucia Peter Roman Jane]

## Source

[Go bufio package - reference](https://pkg.go.dev/bufio)

In this article we have covered ways to read input from a user in Golang.

## Author

My name is Jan Bodnar, and I am a passionate programmer with extensive
programming experience. I have been writing programming articles since 2007.
To date, I have authored over 1,400 articles and 8 e-books. I possess more
than ten years of experience in teaching programming.

List [all Go tutorials](/golang/).