+++
title = "Java Fibonacci"
date = 2025-08-29T19:58:37.503+01:00
draft = false
description = "Java fibonacci tutorial shows how to calculate fibonacci series in Java. We create several algoriths for calculating fibonacci series."
image = ""
imageBig = ""
categories = ["java"]
authors = ["Cude"]
avatar = "/images/avatar.webp"
+++

# Java Fibonacci

last modified February 24, 2024

 

In this article we show how to calculate Fibonacci series in Java. We create
several algorithms for calculating Fibonacci series.

Fibonacci series is a sequence of values such that each number is the
sum of the two preceding ones, starting from 0 and 1.  The beginning of the
sequence is thus: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144 ...

In this article we show several ways to generate a fibonacci series in Java.
Since fibonacci series is a sequence of infinite numbers, we use
BigInteger type for calculations.

## Fibonacci classic loop example

The first algorithm uses a for loop.

Main.java
  

import java.math.BigInteger;

BigInteger fibonacci(int n) {

    if (n &lt;= 1) {
        return BigInteger.valueOf(n);
    }

    BigInteger previous = BigInteger.ZERO, next = BigInteger.ONE, sum;

    for (int i = 2; i &lt;= n; i++) {

        sum = previous;
        previous = next;
        next = sum.add(previous);
    }

    return next;
}

void main() {

    for (int i = 0; i &lt;= 99; i++) {

        BigInteger val = fibonacci(i);
        System.out.println(val);
    }
}

The example prints first one-hundred values of a Fibonacci series.

## Fibonacci recursive example

In the second example, we calculate the Fibonacci series using a recursive
algorithm where the fibonacci method calls itself to do the
calculation.

Main.java
  

import java.math.BigInteger;

BigInteger fibonacci(int n) {

    if (n == 0 || n == 1) {

        return BigInteger.ONE;
    }

    return fibonacci(n - 2).add(fibonacci(n - 1));
}

void main() {

    for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10; i++) {
        System.out.println(fibonacci(i));
    }
}

The example calculates the first ten values of a fibonacci sequence.

BigInteger fibonacci(int n) {

    if (n == 0 || n == 1) {

        return BigInteger.ONE;
    }

    return fibonacci(n - 2).add(fibonacci(n - 1));
}

The algorithm is built in a recursive way. That means that the fibonacci
method calls itself to compute the values.

## Fibonacci stream example

The third example uses streams for the calculation.

Main.java
  

import java.math.BigInteger;
import java.util.List;
import java.util.stream.Collectors;
import java.util.stream.Stream;

List&lt;BigInteger&gt; fibonacci(int limit) {

    var vals = Stream.iterate(new BigInteger[] { BigInteger.ZERO, BigInteger.ONE },
            t -&gt; new BigInteger[] { t[1], t[0].add(t[1]) })
            .limit(limit)
            .map(n -&gt; n[1])
            .collect(Collectors.toList());

    return vals;
}

void main() {

    System.out.println(fibonacci(100));
}

This example calculates the values up to a certain limit.

var vals = Stream.iterate(new BigInteger[] { BigInteger.ZERO, BigInteger.ONE },
        t -&gt; new BigInteger[] { t[1], t[0].add(t[1]) })
        .limit(limit)
        .map(n -&gt; n[1])
        .collect(Collectors.toList());

The Stream.iterate method produces an infinite sequential ordered 
Stream generated by iterative application of a function
f to an initial element seed, producing a Stream
consisting of seed, f(seed), f(f(seed)), etc.

The function (in the form of t -&gt; new BigInteger[] { t[1],
t[0].add(t[1]) } lambda) adds the last two values of the sequence. The
limit method truncates the sequence to limit values.
The map method picks the next fibonacce value from the array.
Finally, we transform the sequence into a list with collect.

## Source

[Fibonacci sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_sequence)

In this article we have shown how to calculate Fibonacci series in Java in three
different ways: classic loop, recursive algorithm and functional way.

## Author

My name is Jan Bodnar, and I am a passionate programmer with extensive
programming experience. I have been writing programming articles since 2007.
To date, I have authored over 1,400 articles and 8 e-books. I possess more
than ten years of experience in teaching programming.

List [all Java tutorials](/java/).