+++
title = "Python dataclass decorator"
date = 2025-08-29T20:07:54.416+01:00
draft = false
description = "Python dataclass tutorial shows how to use dataclass decorators in Python in custom classes. The dataclass decorator helps reduce some boilerplate code."
image = ""
imageBig = ""
categories = ["python"]
authors = ["Cude"]
avatar = "/images/avatar.webp"
+++

# Python dataclass decorator

last modified January 29, 2024

Python dataclass tutorial shows how to use dataclass decorators in Python in
custom classes. The dataclass decorator helps reduce some boilerplate code.

## Python dataclass decorator

The dataclass decorator is used to automatically generate special methods to classes,
including __str__ and __repr__. It helps reduce some boilerplate
code. The dataclass decorator is located in the dataclasses module.

The dataclass decorator examines the class to find fields. A field
is defined as class variable that has a type annotation.

@dataclass
class Test:
...

@dataclass()
class Test:
...

@dataclass(init=True, repr=True, eq=True, order=False, unsafe_hash=False, frozen=False)
class Test:
...

These three declarations are equivalent. If no parameters are set in the
decorator, the default ones are used. If the init parameter is set
to True, the __init__ method will be generated. If
the class already defines the __init__, the parameter is ignored.
If the repr parameter is set to True, the
__repr__ method will be generated. If the class already defines
the __repr__, the parameter is ignored. If the eq
parameter is set to True, the __eq__ method will be
generated. If the class already defines __eq__, this parameter is
ignored.

If the order parameter is set to True, the
__lt__, __le__, __gt__, and
__ge__ methods are generated. If the class already defines
any of the methods, the ValueError is raised.
If the unsafe_hash is defined to False,
the __hash__ method is generated according
to how eq and frozen are set. If the frozen
parameter is set to True, the assignment to fields will generate an
exception.

## Python regular custom class

In a regular custom Python class, we provide a constructor
and other methods such as __repr__ manually.

regular_class.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

class Person:

    def __init__(self, name, age):

        self.name = name
        self.age = age

    def __repr__(self):

        return f'Person{{name: {self.name}, age: {self.age}}}'

p = Person('John Doe', 34)
print(p)

The example shows a Person class with a constructor and
the __repr__ method, which gives a complete representation
of the object.

$ ./regular_class.py
Person{name: John Doe, age: 34}

## Python dataclass example

The following example shows a simple usage of the
dataclass decorator.

simple_dataclass.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Person:
    name: str
    age: int

p = Person('John Doe', 34)
print(p)

We have a class with two fields: name and str.

from dataclasses import dataclass

The dataclass decorator is located in the dataclasses
module.

@dataclass
class Person:
    name: str
    age: int

We apply the dataclass decorator on the Person
class.

p = Person('John Doe', 34)
print(p)

A new person object is created. Its __init__ method
is called, which is auto-generated by the dataclass decorator.

$ ./simple_dataclass.py
Person(name='John Doe', age=34)

## Python dataclass default values

It is possible to provide default values to the fields.

default_values.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Person:
    name: str = 'unknown'
    age: int = 0

p = Person('John Doe', 34)
print(p)

p2 = Person()
print(p2)

In the example, the Person class has two fields; the
fields have some default values.

@dataclass
class Person:
    name: str = 'unknown'
    age: int = 0

With the assignment operator (=), we give the fields default values.

p2 = Person()
print(p2)

When we do not provide values in the constructor, the fields
will have default values.

$ ./default_values.py
Person(name='John Doe', age=34)
Person(name='unknown', age=0)

## The dataclass frozen parameter

If the frozen parameter is set to True,
we cannot assign values to fields.

frozen.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass(frozen=True)
class Person:
    name: str
    age: int

p = Person('John Doe', 34)
p.occupation = 'gardener'

print(p)
print(p.occupation)

In the example, the frozen parameter is set
to True. The program fails with the following error
message: dataclasses.FrozenInstanceError: cannot assign to field 'occupation'.

## The dataclass asdict function

The asdict function converts a dataclass instance to a
dict of its fields.

as_dict_fun.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

from dataclasses import dataclass, asdict

@dataclass
class Person:
    name: str
    occupation: str
    age: int

p = Person('John Doe', 'gardener', 34)
print(p)

print(asdict(p))

In the example, we print the fields of the Person class with
the help of the asdict function.

$ ./as_dict_fun.py
Person(name='John Doe', occupation='gardener', age=34)
{'name': 'John Doe', 'occupation': 'gardener', 'age': 34}

The first line is the output of the __repr__ method.
The second line is the dictionary of the fields.

## The dataclass field function

With the field function, we can provide
some additional per-field information.

fields.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

from dataclasses import dataclass, field

@dataclass
class Person:
    name: str
    age: int
    occupation: str = field(init=False, repr=False)

p = Person('John Doe', 34)
print(p)

p.occupation = "Gardener"
print(f'{p.name} is a {p.occupation}')

In the example, we have an additional occupation field.

occupation: str = field(init=False, repr=False)

The occupation field is not included in the __init__
and __repr__ methods.

$ ./fields.py
Person(name='John Doe', age=34)
John Doe is a Gardener

## Python dataclass with pattern match

The next example uses a data class with pattern matching syntax.

points.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class Point:
    x: int
    y: int

def check(p):
    match p:
        case Point(x=0, y=0):
            print("Origin")
        case Point(x, y) if y == 0:
            print(f"on x axis")
        case Point(x, y) if x == 0:
            print(f"on y axis")
        case Point(x, y) if x &gt; 0 and y &gt; 0:
            print("Q I")
        case Point(x, y) if x &lt; 0 and y &gt; 0:
            print("Q II")
        case Point(x, y) if x &lt; 0 and y &lt; 0:
            print("Q III")
        case Point(x, y) if x &gt; 0 and y &lt; 0:
            print("Q IV")
        case _:
            print("Not a point")

points = [Point(3, 0), Point(0, 0), Point(-4, -5), Point(-4, 0), Point(0, 5),
          Point(4, 8), Point(-5, 3), Point(6, -4)]

for p in points:
    check(p)

We have a list of Point objects. With match/case
keywords, we assign each point to the origin, x and y axis, or one of the 
four quadrants. 

case Point(x=0, y=0):
    print("Origin")

In this case arm, we match against a point which has x=0 and y=0 coordinates.

case Point(x, y) if x &gt; 0 and y &gt; 0:
    print("Q I")

Using guards, we check if the point lies in the first quadrant.

$ ./points.py 
on x axis
Origin
Q III
on x axis
on y axis
Q I
Q II
Q IV

## Source

[Python data classes - language reference](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html)

In this article we have worked with Python dataclass decorators.

## Author

My name is Jan Bodnar, and I am a passionate programmer with extensive
programming experience. I have been writing programming articles since 2007.
To date, I have authored over 1,400 articles and 8 e-books. I possess more
than ten years of experience in teaching programming.

List [all Python tutorials](/python/).