+++
title = "Python simplejson"
date = 2025-08-29T20:10:23.127+01:00
draft = false
description = "Python simplejson tutorial shows how to read and write JSON data with Python simplejson module."
image = ""
imageBig = ""
categories = ["python"]
authors = ["Cude"]
avatar = "/images/avatar.webp"
+++

# Python simplejson

last modified January 29, 2024

In this article we show how to read and write JSON data with Python simplejson
module.

## JSON

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a lightweight data-interchange format. It
is easily read and written by humans and parsed and generated by machines. The
application/json is the official Internet media type for JSON. The
JSON filename extension is .json.

## The simplejson module

The simplejson is simple, fast, complete, and extensible JSON encoder
and decoder for Python 2.5+ and Python 3.3+. It is pure Python code with no
dependencies.

The simplejson module is included in modern Python versions. The
decoder can handle incoming JSON strings of any specified encoding (UTF-8 by
default)

## Using simplejson

import json

To use simplejson module, we import json.

## Simplejson conversion table

The following table shows how data types are converted between Python and JSON.

PythonJSON

dict, namedtupleobject
list, tuplearray
str, unicodestring
int, long, floatnumber
Truetrue
Falsefalse
Nonenull

## The json.dump

The json.dump method serializes Python object as a JSON formatted
stream to a file object.

json_dump.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

data = {"name": "Jane", "age": 17}

with open('friends.json', 'w') as f:
    json.dump(data, f)

The example serializes a Python dictionary into JSON with json.dump
method. The JSON data is written to friends.json file.

$ cat friends.json
{"age": 17, "name": "Jane"}

After executing the script, we have this data.

## The json.dumps

The json.dumps method serializes Python object to a JSON string.

json_dumps.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

data = [{"name": "Jane", "age": 17}, {"name": "Thomas", "age": 27}]

json_data = json.dumps(data)
print(repr(json_data))

The example serializes a Python list into JSON string with json.dumps
method. The JSON data is printed to the console.

$ ./json_dumps.py
'[{"name": "Jane", "age": 17}, {"name": "Thomas", "age": 27}]'

## The json.load

The json.load method deserializes a file object containing
a JSON document to a Python object.

config.json
  

{
  "theme" : "bluespring",
  "size": "small",
  "splashscreen": "false"
}

The config.json file contains this data.

read_config.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

with open('config.json') as f:

    config = json.load(f)

    print('Theme: {}'.format(config['theme']))
    print('Size: {}'.format(config['size']))
    print('Splash screen: {}'.format(config['splashscreen']))

The example reads configuration data from config.json file
with json.load and prints the data to the terminal.

$ ./read_config.py
Theme: bluespring
Size: small
Splash screen: false

## The json.loads

The json.loads method deserializes a JSON string to a Python
object.

simplejson_loads.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

json_data = '{"name": "Jane", "age": 17}'

data = json.loads(json_data)

print(type(json_data))
print(type(data))

print(data)

The example deserializes a JSON string into a Python dictionary.

$ ./simple.py
&lt;class 'str'&gt;
&lt;class 'dict'&gt;
{'name': 'Jane', 'age': 17}

## Simplejson read JSON from URL

The following example reads JSON data from a web page. We get JSON data
from http://time.jsontest.com.

$ curl http://time.jsontest.com
{
    "date": "08-08-2023",
    "milliseconds_since_epoch": 1691506979261,
    "time": "03:02:59 PM"
 }

A GET request to this site returns this JSON string.

parse_json_url.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json
import urllib.request

hres = urllib.request.urlopen('http://time.jsontest.com')

data = json.loads(hres.read().decode("utf-8"))

print('Unix time: {}'.format(data['milliseconds_since_epoch']))
print('Time: {}'.format(data['time']))
print('Date: {}'.format(data['date']))

In the example, we use urllib.request module to
create a request to the web site.

data = json.loads(hres.read().decode("utf-8"))

From the returned response, we transform the JSON string into a Python
dictionary with json.loads method.

print('Unix time: {}'.format(data['milliseconds_since_epoch']))
print('Time: {}'.format(data['time']))
print('Date: {}'.format(data['date']))

With the help of Python's format method, we print the retrieved data
to the console.

$ ./parse_json_url.py
Unix time: 1691507071395
Time: 03:04:31 PM
Date: 08-08-2023

## Pretty printing

With simplejson we can easily pretty print our data.

pretty_print_json.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

json_data = {"name":"Audi", "model":"2012", "price":22000,
                 "colours":["gray", "red", "white"]}

data = json.dumps(json_data, sort_keys=True, indent=4 * ' ')

print(data)

With sort_keys and indent options we nicely format the
JSON data.

$ ./pretty_print_json.py
{
    "colours": [
        "gray",
        "red",
        "white"
    ],
    "model": "2012",
    "name": "Audi",
    "price": 22000
}

## Simplejson custom class

Simplejson serializes and deserializes only a few Python objects, which are
listed in the conversion table. For custom Python objects, we need to do some
additional steps.

custom_class.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

class Person:

    def __init__(self, name, age):

        self.name = name
        self.age = age

p = Person("Lucy", 23)

json_data = json.dumps(p.__dict__)

print(repr(json_data))

In this example, we serialize a custom object into JSON.

json_data = json.dumps(p.__dict__)

The trick is to use the __dict__ attribute, which stores
the object attributes (name and age).

$ ./custom_class.py
'{"name": "Lucy", "age": 23}'

## Simplejson list of custom classes

In the next example, we show how to serialize
a list of custom classes.

custom_class_list.py
  

#!/usr/bin/python

import json

class Person:

    def __init__(self, name, age):

        self.name = name
        self.age = age

    def toJson(self):
        '''
        Serialize the object custom object
        '''
        return json.dumps(self, default=lambda o: o.__dict__,
                sort_keys=True, indent=4)

p1 = Person("Lucy", 23)
p2 = Person("Thomas", 29)

people = []
people.append(json.loads(p1.toJson()))
people.append(json.loads(p2.toJson()))

json_data = json.dumps(people)

print(repr(json_data))

We have created a toJson method that serializes the object.

people = []
people.append(json.loads(p1.toJson()))
people.append(json.loads(p2.toJson()))

We call the toJson method when we add the objects
to the list.

$ ./custom_class_list.py
'[{"age": 23, "name": "Lucy"}, {"age": 29, "name": "Thomas"}]'

## Source

[Python json — JSON encoder and decoder](https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.html)

In this article we have worked with the Python simplejson library.

## Author

My name is Jan Bodnar, and I am a passionate programmer with extensive
programming experience. I have been writing programming articles since 2007.
To date, I have authored over 1,400 articles and 8 e-books. I possess more
than ten years of experience in teaching programming.

List [all Python tutorials](/python/).